---
layout: post
title: What's pinscher, and Why?
tags: [projects, pinscher]
---

[pinscher](https://github.com/WilliamMayor/pinscher) is a cool little password manager that I'm writing in Python. Currently it's a python script that uses SQLite3 and PyCrypto to secure a database of credentials. Credentials are secured using two-factor authentication: the database is encrypted with AES-256-CBC encryption using a keyfile on the user's computer, each password is then encrypted again using a user's PIN. The encrypted database can be stored in DropBox and therefore shared across machines, the keyfile should be carefully copied to each permitted machine. The PIN stays in the user's head and is never stored digitally. For easy access I've made an [AlfredApp](http://www.alfredapp.com/) extension.

A couple of years ago I decided to do something about the fact that I had maybe three passwords, varying in complexity. I did what I'm sure lots of people still do, have a complicated password for important things and less complicated (and therefore easier to remember) password for others. I realised that this was a problem and I decided to instead use a password manager to auto generate complicated passwords and remember them for me. 

The trouble was that I really didn't like any of the password managers out there already, mostly because they were really ugly and over-engineered. [KeePass](http://keepass.info/) and it's many unofficial ports look like something Windows 95 threw up on. I like that it's open source but if I want to use a piece of software many times every day I need it to seamlessly fit into my work flow. I didn't feel I was going to get that from KeePass at all.

[1Password](https://agilebits.com/onepassword) on the other hand, looks gorgeous. It touts features that seem like they would make password generation and recovery really quick and simple. It's also multi-platform and has cloud synchronising via DropBox. Nice. The big issue here is that it's not open source. Nobody can dive in and have a look at what 1Password is doing with your data. There's a chance (an extremely remote one) that the application logs all of your passwords and sends them off to some central server somewhere to be sold off. This situation is so unlikely that it's basically just not happening. The point is, we can't tell, and I think that's an important thing in a password manager. Also, a `Cmd-f secur` on their homepage doesn't give you any information about how securely they store your data. Just promises that things are secure. 

[LastPass](https://lastpass.com/) is interesting, a more browser-based solution that excels in auto-filling forms. It looks nicer than KeePass but not as nice as 1Password. Again, it's not open source (but there is a free option), I couldn't fully trust it. There are loads of password managers out there, [here's a Wikipedia list](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Category:Password_managers).

OK, so that's why pinscher, I needed a nice looking, seamlessly integrated, open source password manager and I couldn't find one. So what did I come up with?

DISCLAIMER: It's not finished yet, there's lots more to be done.

As the top of this page states, I've written a Python script that decrypts a file that contains a SQLite3 database of credentials. The file is encrypted using AES-256-CBC encryption, the key and IV for which come from a keyfile stored on the user's computer. In the database there are fields for `domain`, `username`, and `password`. Pretty self explanatory, an entry into the database might look like `google`, `william@gmail.com`, `password123`. Except that the password is further encrypted to provide a little more security. I still use AES-256-CBC, but this time I use combinations of the domain, the username and a PIN, provided by the user, to create the key and IV. You can check out the the [code on GitHub](https://github.com/WilliamMayor/pinscher) if you want to see more details.

Of course the Python script isn't very user friendly so I'm in the process of making some nice UIs. The first of which is the AlfredApp extension. Using the extension you can tell Alfred to search your credentials for matching domains and/or usernames. If he finds a single match, he'll try to use the PIN you give him to decrypt the password and add it to your clipboard. If he finds multiple matches he'll display them in a list. Currently the extension uses Alfred v1, so the extension is quite dumb. If you have multiple matches then you have to re-run your search from scratch rather than being able to refine it as you go. Hopefully, Alfred v2 will improve on this.